Measuring Speed of Sound
Jeon Jung-Kook (ì „ì •êµ­), who is an electrical engineering student, is playing his flute inside his bedroom. However, the flute sounds out-of-tune, and he is 100% sure that the flute itself is fully fine, nothing is broken. So he thinks that the speed of sound inside his bedroom must be deviating from the normal value due to the temperature inside his bedroom.
To verify his hypothesis, he then prepares a simple experiment to measure the speed of sound inside his bedroom, adopting the concept of interference which he learnt in physics class. He uses a signal generator, 2 (two) speakers, a micropohone, an amplifier, and a voltmeter for his experiment. Signal generator and speakers are utilized to generate sound waves with a specific frequency, whereas the microphone, with the help of amplifier and voltmeter, is utilized to detect the resulting sound intensity generated by the two speakers.
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup is shown in the figure above. A sinusoidal wave with frequency f is generated by the signal generator. Then the two speakers, which are separated by distance d from each other, produce sound waves with the same frequency. Suppose that the speed of sound inside the room is vs.
a) Determine the value of fmin and fmax, the sound frequency when the the two speakers produce destructive and constructive interference, respectively! Express your answer in terms of d and vs!
Experimental Data
Jung-Kook starts collecting experimental data by changing the frequency f generated by signal generator, and then he measures the resulting sound intensity using voltmeter. Let us assume that the relation between sound intensity I received by the microphone, and the voltage V measured by the voltmeter is given by ğ‘‰=ğ‘|âˆšğ¼|
where c is a proportional constant. The experimental data collected by Jung-Kook is shown in the table below.
Suppose that the distance between the two speakers is given by d=(B1B2Ã—20)cm
b) Based on this experimental data, please help Oppa Jung-Kook to determine the speed of sound vs inside his bedroom!
Validation
To verify whether his experimental result is valid or not, Jung-Kook performs one final experiment. He changes the distance between the speakers into ğ‘‘=(ğ›½3ğ›½4Ã—10) ğ‘ğ‘š
Starting from 0 Hz, he then slowly increases the sound frequency generated by the speakers.
c) At what frequency Oppa Jung-Kook will find the first destructive (fmin,1) and constructive (fmax,1) interference at this condition?